---
tittel: "Regulations on observation flights conducted under the Treaty on Open Skies"
korttittel: "Regulations on observation flights conducted under the Treaty on Open Skies"
refid: "forskrift/2017-12-20-2329"
eli: "/eli/forskrift/2017/12/20/2329"
departement: "Samferdselsdepartementet"
ikrafttredelse: "2018-01-01"
---

# Regulations on observation flights conducted under the Treaty on Open Skies

### Section 1. Purpose

The purpose of these regulations is to clarify the conduct of observation flights by state parties, which are considered civil aviation flights, when performing observation flights in Norway and Norwegian airspace in accordance with the Treaty on Open Skies of 24 March 1992.

### Section 2. Definitions and abbreviations

For the purpose of these Regulations, the below terms from the Treaty on Open Skies are meant to be understood as follows:

- - «Observed Party» means the State Party, i.e. Norway, or group of States Parties, over whose territory an observation flight is conducted or is intended to be conducted, from the time it has received notification thereof from an observing Party until completion of the procedures relating to that flight, or personnel acting on behalf of that State Party or group of States Parties.
- - «Observing Party» means the State Party or group of States Parties that intends to conduct or conducts an observation flight over the territory of another State Party or group of States Parties, from the time that it has provided notification of its intention to conduct an observation flight until completion of the procedures relating to that flight, or personnel acting on behalf of that State Party or group of States Parties.
- - «Point of entry» means a point designated by the observed Party for the arrival of personnel of the observing Party on the territory of the observed Party.
- - «Point of exit» means a point designated by the observed Party for the departure of personnel of the observing Party from the territory of the observed Party.
- - «Open Skies airfield» means an airfield designated by the observed Party as a point where an observation flight may commence or terminate.
- - «Refuelling airfield» means an airfield designated by the observed Party used for fuelling and servicing of observation aircraft and transport aircraft.
- - «Observation aircraft» means an unarmed, fixed wing aircraft designated to make observation flights, registered by the relevant authorities of a State Party and equipped with agreed sensors.
- - «Sensor» means equipment of a category specified in Article IV, paragraph 1 of the Treaty on Open Skies that is installed on an observation aircraft for use during the conduct of observation flights.

For the purpose of these Regulations, the below abbreviations are meant to be understood as follows:

- - AMSL: Above Mean Sea Level
- - ATC: Air Traffic Control.

### Section 3. Principal rule

All observation flights must be carried out in accordance with the Treaty on Open Skies, the filed flight plan (FPL) and applicable air traffic regulations.

### Section 4. Point of entry/exit

Point of entry and point of exit shall be Oslo Airport, Gardermoen (ENGM), N 60-12-10, E 011-05-02.

### Section 5. Open Skies Airfields

The following are the Norwegian Open Skies airfields:

- - Oslo Airport, Gardermoen (ENGM), N 60-12-10, E 011-05-02
- - Bardufoss Airport (ENDU), N69-03-21, E 018-32-25.

### Section 6. Refuelling airfield

Refuelling may take place at Trondheim Airport, Værnes (ENVA), N 63-27-27, E 010-55-27.

### Section 7. Priority

In accordance with the Treaty on Open Skies, aircraft undertaking observation flights are to be afforded priority over any regular air traffic.

When within controlled airspace, observation flights are to be afforded non-deviating status and priority over all other aircraft except

- - aircraft in an emergency
- - aircraft performing roles where the safety of life is involved
- - aircraft transporting heads of state
- - state aircraft performing roles for national security.

Observation flights outside of controlled airspace (Class G airspace) must be carried out in accordance with standardised European visual flight rules (VFR) and give way accordingly.

### Section 8. Flight Safety

In order to ensure the highest level of flight safety all observation flights should be carried out in controlled airspace. All flights in controlled airspace requires ATC clearance. Except when necessary for take-off or landing flights in terminal control areas (TMA) must be carried out at minimum 7000 feet AMSL.

For flight safety reasons and to assist in affording priority over other regular air traffic, whilst operating outside of controlled airspace (Class G airspace), observation flights are strongly recommended to remain within the bounds of radio and surveillance coverage.

For flight safety reasons it should be published a NOTAM that informs about the observation flights.

### Section 9. Existing restricted and danger areas

Restricted and danger areas that are effected by observation flights shall be deactivated, and information to relevant operators and agencies shall be distributed accordingly.

If the area in question cannot be deactivated, Norwegian armed forces personnel must ensure that the flight can be safely conducted.

### Section 10. Language proficiency

For flight safety reasons the pilot and pilot-in-command must have minimum Operational Level (Level 4) in English in accordance with the ICAO Language Proficiency Rating Scale.

### Section 11. Inspection of observation aircraft and sensors

Norwegian authorities may conduct an examination and inventory of the observation aircraft and sensors, as specified in the Treaty on Open Skies, at Oslo Airport, Gardermoen.

Norwegian aviation authorities may demand access to any aircraft that is used for aviation activities in Norway and perform a ramp inspection, cf. Aviation Act 11 June 1993 No 101 section 4-8 .

### Section 12. Infringements

Observation flights that violates the regime established in the Treaty on Open Skies or applicable air traffic regulations must immediately be terminated. The air traffic control or chief flight monitor have the authority to terminate the flight.

### Section 13. Amendment of other regulations

At the time of entry into force the following amendments are made to existing regulations:

- - Forskrift 11. januar 1995 nr. 42om opprettelse av restriksjonsområde EN R402 punkt 1.1.4 skal lyde: Restriksjonene i denne forskrift gjelder ikke for ambulanseflyginger og flyginger etter Avtalen om det åpne luftrom.
- - Forskrift 11. desember 2006 nr. 1388om opprettelse av restriksjonsområde EN R203 § 3 andre ledd skal lyde: Også ambulanse-, politi-, søk- og redningsoppdrag og flyginger etter Avtalen om det åpne luftrom må innhente særskilt tillatelse fra Lufttrafikktjenesten på Flesland før flyging i området EN R203 kan gjennomføres.
- - Forskrift 16. oktober 2007 nr. 1152om opprettelse av et permanent restriksjonsområde EN R102 over sentrum av Oslo§ 3andre ledd skal lyde: Forbudet gjelder ikke flyging i forbindelse med politi-, ambulanse-, forsvars-, søk- og redningsoppdrag og flyginger etter Avtalen om det åpne luftrom under forutsetning av at flygingen innrettes etter publiserte anbefalinger for VFR-trafikk i Oslo-området.
- - Forskrift 22. januar 2016 nr. 49om etablering av permanent restriksjonsområde EN R103 over området rundt Kongsvinger i forbindelse med det årlige World Rally Championship, Rally Sweden§ 4andre punktum skal lyde: Operasjoner i tilknytning til militær-, ambulanse-, politi-, søk- og redningsoppdrag og flyginger etter Avtalen om det åpne luftrom skal prioriteres foran annen trafikk i restriksjonsområdet.

### Section 14. Entry into force

These regulations shall enter into force 1 January 2018.
